# asciicast v2

asciicast v2 is a file format for terminal sessions based on [newline-delimited
JSON](http://jsonlines.org/), recorded by [asciinema CLI](../cli/index.md) (2.0
and later).

First line, encoded as JSON object, represents [the header](#header), which
contains metadata, like initial terminal size, timestamp, etc.

All following lines form  [the event stream](#event-stream). _Each line_
represents a separate event, encoded as 3-element JSON array.

``` json title="example.cast"
{"version": 2, "width": 80, "height": 24, "timestamp": 1504467315, "title": "Demo", "env": {"TERM": "xterm-256color", "SHELL": "/bin/zsh"}}
[0.248848, "o", "\u001b[1;31mHello \u001b[32mWorld!\u001b[0m\n"]
[1.001376, "o", "That was ok\rThis is better."]
[1.500000, "m", ""]
[2.143733, "o", "Now... "]
[4.050000, "r", "80x24"]
[6.541828, "o", "Bye!"]
```

## Header

asciicast header is JSON-encoded object containing recording meta-data.

### Required header attributes:

#### `version`

Must be set to `2`. Integer.

#### `width`

Initial terminal width, i.e number of columns. Integer.

#### `height`

Initial terminal height, i.e. number of rows. Integer.

### Optional header attributes:

#### `timestamp`

Unix timestamp of the beginning of the recording session. Integer.

#### `duration`

Duration of the whole recording in seconds (when it's known upfront). Float.

#### `idle_time_limit`

Idle time limit, as given via `-i` option to `asciinema rec`. Float.

This should be used by an asciicast player to reduce all terminal inactivity
(delays between frames) to maximum of `idle_time_limit` value.

#### `command`

Command that was recorded, as given via `-c` option to `asciinema rec`. String.

#### `title`

Title of the asciicast, as given via `-t` option to `asciinema rec`. String.

#### `env`

Map of captured environment variables. Object (String -> String).

Example env:

```json
"env": { "SHELL": "/bin/bash", "TERM": "xterm-256color" }
```

> Official asciinema recorder captures only `SHELL` and `TERM` by default. All
> implementations of asciicast-compatible terminal recorder should not capture
> any additional environment variables unless explicitly requested by the user.

#### `theme`

Color theme of the recorded terminal. Object, with the following attributes:

- `fg` - normal text color,
- `bg` - normal background color,
- `palette` - list of 8 or 16 colors, separated by colon character.

All colors are in the CSS `#rrggbb` format.

Example theme:

```json
"theme": { "fg": "#d0d0d0", "bg": "#212121", "palette": "#151515:#ac4142:#7e8e50:#e5b567:#6c99bb:#9f4e85:#7dd6cf:#d0d0d0:#505050:#ac4142:#7e8e50:#e5b567:#6c99bb:#9f4e85:#7dd6cf:#f5f5f5" }
```

!!! note

    asciinema CLI, since verion 3.0, captures the original terminal theme
    automatically.

    If you're implementing an asciicast-compatible recorder, then you can
    retrieve the colors from the terminal via OSC sequences (this is how
    asciinema recorder does it). However, you can also use another technique,
    such as using `xrdb` (on Linux).

## Event stream

Each element of the event stream is a 3-tuple encoded as JSON array:

    [time, code, data]

Where:

* `time` (float) - indicates when the event happened, represented as the number
  of seconds since the beginning of the recording session,
* `code` (string) - specifies type of event, one of: `"o"`, `"i"`, `"m"`, `"r"`
* `data` (any) - event specific data, described separately for each event
  code.

For example, let's look at the following line:

    [1.001376, "o", "Hello world"]

It represents:

* output (code `o`),
* of text `Hello world`,
* which happened `1.001376` sec after the start of the recording session.

### Supported event codes

This section describes the event codes supported in asciicast v2 format.

The list is open to extension, and new event codes may be added in both the
current and future versions of the format. For example, we may add new event
code for text overlay (subtitles display).

A tool which interprets the event stream (web/cli player, post-processor) should
ignore (or pass through) event codes it doesn't understand or doesn't care
about.

#### o - output, data written to a terminal

Event with code `"o"` represents printing new data to a terminal.

`data` is a string containing the data that was printed. It must be valid, UTF-8
encoded JSON string as described in [JSON RFC section
2.5](http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc4627.txt), with any non-printable Unicode
codepoints encoded as `\uXXXX`.

Example:

```json
[5.0, "o", "hello"]
```

#### i - input, data read from a terminal

Event with code `"i"` represents character typed in by the user, or more
specifically, raw data sent from a terminal emulator to stdin of the recorded
program (usually shell).

`data` is a string containing captured ASCII character representing a key, or a
control character like `"\r"` (enter), `"\u0001"` (ctrl-a), `"\u0003"` (ctrl-c),
etc. Like with `"o"` event, it's UTF-8 encoded JSON string, with any
non-printable Unicode codepoints encoded as `\uXXXX`.

Example:

```json
[5.0, "i", "h"]
```

!!! note

    asciinema CLI doesn't capture keyboard input by default. All implementations
    of asciicast-compatible terminal recorder should not capture it either
    unless explicitly requested by the user.

#### m - marker

Event with code `"m"` represents a marker.

Markers can act as breakpoints or be used for playback navigation and
automation.

`data`, which specifies a label, is optional (can be empty string). Labels may
be used to e.g. create a list of named "chapters".

Example:

```json
[5.0,  "m", ""] // unlabeled marker
[10.0, "m", "Configuration"] // labeled marker
```

#### r - resize

Event with code `"r"` represents terminal resize.

Those are captured in response to `SIGWINCH` signal.

`data` contains new terminal size (columns + rows) formatted as
`"{COLS}x{ROWS}"`.

```json
[5.0, "r", "100x50"]
```

## File extension

Suggested file extension is `.cast`.

## Media type (MIME)

Suggested media type is `application/x-asciicast`.

## Note on compatibility

asciicast v2 file format enables incremental, real-time writing to disk, which
was not possible with v1 format. The main benefits are:

* minimal memory usage when recording and replaying arbitrarily long sessions -
  disk space is the only limit,
* when the recording session is interrupted (e.g. computer crash, accidental
  close of terminal window) you don't lose the whole recording,
* it's real-time streaming friendly.

However, due to file structure change (standard JSON => newline-delimited JSON)
version 2 is not backwards compatible with version 1.

Support for v2 has been added in:

* asciinema cli [v2.0](https://github.com/asciinema/asciinema/releases/tag/v2.0.0)
* asciinema player [v2.6](https://github.com/asciinema/asciinema-player/releases/tag/v2.6.0)
* asciinema server [v20171105](https://github.com/asciinema/asciinema-server/releases/tag/v20171105)
